# Chapter 1: Metaphor Machines

In the 1990s, I understood Jean Baudrillard's writing on simulacra in
relationship to the media entertainment complex: amusement parks, virtual
reality, and reality television. Today his writing gains another layer of
meaning related directly to the ubiquity of personal computing. Computers, as
I will argue in this chapter, do more than compute. They are metaphor machines
that mediate experience universally. They interject in simple everyday acts
from drinking coffee in the morning, through automatic brewing machines and
payment systems, to going to bed as alarm clocks and night activity monitors.

Baudrillard writes about the "genesis of simulacra," which culminates
precisely in the totalizing mediation of code:

> At the limit of an always increasing elimination of references and
> finalities, an ever-increasing loss of resemblances and designations, we
> find the digital and programmatic sign, whose "value" is purely *tactical*,
> at the intersection of other signals ("bits" of information/tests) whose
> structure is that of a micromolecular code of command and control
> [@baudrillard_simulacra_1994, 139-140].

<!-- check the page numbers -->

My concern here is with the structure of code, the programmatic sign, which
splits its energies between the screen and hard drive. On the screen, at the
site of projection, the programmatic sign simulates familiar materialities:
buttons, bins, files, folders, drawers, desktops, windows, tiles, wood grain,
drop shadows, chrome. At the site of storage, from which the sign emanates,
the language changes to the vocabulary of control, referring to central
processing units, compilation, commitment, extraction, command, condition,
initiation, handling, function, persistence, and execution. In the rift
between the sites of storage---what is---and projection---what appears to
be---the programmatic sign undergoes a series of structural transformations.
What originates from (a) the keyboard as the mechanical action of a switch
becomes (b) an electric signal that (c) leaves a magnetic mark in computer
memory, which (d) further morphs into a phase of the liquid crystal on the
screen, leaving behind (e) the letter that emanates outward as light.
Programming languages, rules for transformation between media, bridge the
passage between bodies, screens, and archives, breaking thought up into
differentiated units for transfer. Simulation emerges in the reassembly of
such units back into a continuous integrated whole. Texts dissolve into
letters and pixels which then congeal back into holistic literary works.

Roman Jakobson called such construction and deconstruction of meaning the
"profuse exchange of ritualized formulas" or the phatic function of language
[@malinowski_problem_1923, 146; @jakobson_linguistics_1960, 355]. In the
phatic function lies the essence of programming. Code shapes and commands. At
the same time, it conjures fantastical metaphors to occlude the structure of
shaping and commanding. Simulation obscures the incongruence between visible
representation and the underlying material affordances of the medium. What you
see is not always what you get. We are instead confronted with a composite
image, which under examination reveals a complex process of transfiguration
between the visible sign and the sign at the site of the inscription. When
reading online, for example, we observe what looks like a book, where we
should also perceive an attempt to censor and surveil. The simulation is
without a referent. It bares little resemblance to the material substrata of
electronic reading. We believe we are handling a book. Our ideas about reading
and interpretation subsequently rely on that initial physical point of contact
with paper. But when reading electronically, we are handling something other
than print material. The semblance to paper guides our intuitions about the
possibilities of the medium: the ability to scroll, bookmark, or turn pages.
We have far fewer intuitions about the affordances of inscription at the
micromolecular level. As we "turn the page" on the screen an electric charge
embedded into a solid state medium crosses the impenetrable oxide barrier,
reaching its destination, the floating gate, through quantum tunnelling, which
exploits the wave-particle duality of matter and its corollary the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle [@pavan_flash_1997; @aaron_flash_2002;
@bez_introduction_2003]. In this way, the everyday inscription---a digital
word---comprises numerous improbable events at quantum scale.

What can be said then about the practices of reading and interpretation
grounded in such remote physicalities? For now, only that they continue to
unfold figuratively, removed from the material conditions of knowledge
production. Metaphor sustains our lives in digital worlds artificially, by
analogy with habituated media. We already know what to do with paper; the
electronic book therefore replicates paper. Such metaphors dull the discomfort
at the point of contact between human and machine. They hinder the effort of
mastering poetics at the quantum level: the ability to inject electrons, draw
lattices, manipulate arrays, affect solid states of being. It is tempting to
view media ecosystems that host our digital lives as a kind of a natural
element like water or air. But we should not forget also that computational
ecologies are constructed environments. They are not governed by the laws of
physics in the same sense that clouds or oceans are. They form a part of a
massive tactical effort to bring private spaces of inhabitance---think the
*Home* folder on your computer, your family photo album, your digital
bookmarks---under the purview of computational control. The simulation encodes
political structures that should not be naturalized, lest we succumb to the
complacency of technological determinism. Our goal in this chapter is to
arrest the advance of the metaphor. We must begin to separate resemblances
from their designations: the apparent shape from a command in the imperative.

What does it mean to turn a page in a medium that sustains neither turning nor
pages? In this chapter, we will use the tools of cognitive metaphor theory to
tell the story of metaphor's influence on computation, at a formative moment
in the history of human-computer interaction. I plan to approach this
tradition from within, taking on its language and assumptions in the first
several sections of the chapter. The latter sections capture the historical
transition between literal computing, by which users gave explicit commands to
their machines, and the so-called "direct manipulation" model, by which they
began to occupy virtual, figurative environments. The chapter draws on the
archives from graphic design, literary theory, and computer science---fields
that come into direct contact in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. The trajectory
from the conversational to the "direct" model of human-computer interaction
points to the speculative possibility of seemingly unmediated coupling between
human and machine---a possibility that I would like to acknowledge and finally
reject outright in the conclusion of the chapter. The appeal to immediacy and
immersion in the principles of "direct" manipulation conceals the nature of
mediation.

## Verisimilitude

From the many available theories of metaphor, in this chapter I rely on the
ideas from the so called "cognitive metaphor" school developed extensively by
George Lakoff, Mark Johnson, and Mark Turner among others in the 1980s. As we
shall see later on in the chapter, this school of thought gained influence in
the formative period in the history of human-computer interaction. It is
therefore important for me examine the vocabulary of that tradition on its own
terms and to advance its critique from within. It also bares mentioning that
in the language of cognitive metaphor theory all figurative tropes of
comparison---hyperbole, metonymy, synecdoche, or simile---fall under the
category of metaphor. To avoid confusions of the sort, to get onto the same
page if you will, I would like to spend a few pages now delving into the
technical vocabulary of metaphor theory. This language will later help us
explore the ways by which metaphors make and unmake everyday computational
environments of human habitation. I am interested here and throughout the book
in a particular mode of virtual habitation and habituation, which by its very
nature begins and ends with the technologies of metaphor.

In the 1980s, a number of influential publications in the field of
human-computer interaction relied on insights from cognitive metaphor theory
to refashion computers from business productivity tools into tools of the
imagination, as ultimate metaphor machines. In this light, computer interfaces
mediate the transference between human and machine, at the liminal space where
two disparate systems of representation meet to exchange information.
Interfaces can be said to translate machine states---the configuration of open
and closed circuits---into pictures, numbers, and letters, all species of
human cognitive states. The metaphor machine, a mechanism for universal
symbolic transference, is capable of simulating anything that can be
represented symbolically.[^ln1-database]

The language of computation reveals its reliance on structural metaphor in
practice.  Consider the following passage from a patent filed by Xerox in
1991. It describes, in its own words, "an electronic library metaphor," which
includes:

> a shared books with database metaphor, a reference books metaphor, and a
> card catalog metaphor in one system that allows large object oriented data
> bases to be organized and accessed in an exclusive environment and in
> addition allows access to screen icons, creates a visual hierarchy of
> related and shared objects, and allows mutually exclusive access to the
> metaphors within the library [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1].

The invention ultimately enables the "organizing, accessing, and querying of
information unique to physical libraries in an electronic workstation
environment" [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1]. Setting aside, for a moment, the
peculiarity of being able to patent a metaphor, note the idiosyncrasy of the
technical language. What does it mean to "access" a metaphor? When someone
"checks out" a book from the electronic library, do they gain access to the
book or to the metaphor alone? What mechanisms assure the correspondence
between a database and database metaphor, the book and book metaphor, and the
catalog and catalog metaphor? Traditional metaphor theory strains to answer
such questions.

In the so-called classical view, metaphors are simply a type of figurative
language. To say "the day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops" is to use
the verb "stand" in a novel linguistic context. Days have no literal legs to
stand on. John Searle, George Lakoff, and Mark Turner, among others, have
argued that metaphors are more broadly a cognitive phenomenon, mapping
distinct ontological categories across "conceptual domains"
[@lakoff_metaphors_1980; @turner_death_1987; @lakoff_contemporary_1998,
@searle_metaphor_1998]. In the modified view, even such basic semantic
concepts as "state, quantity, action, cause, purpose, means, modality" are
metaphorical in nature [@lakoff_metaphorical_1980; @lakoff_contemporary_1998,
212]. Beyond figurative lyrical language, Lakoff and others have argued that
metaphors broadly structure everyday experience. Thus the analysis of common
phrases like "things are looking up" and "I can't get that tune out of my
mind" reveals underlying figuration like "good things are up" and "the mind is
a container." The idea that "good things are up" generates a multitude of
metaphors like "profits are going up" and "moving on up," for example
[@lakoff_metaphorical_1980, 195-198]

!["An exemplary interface for viewing a three dimensional book"
[@card_methods_2006, 3].](images/book-metaphor.png)

!["Alternate display techniques for information about a big book"
[@card_methods_2006,4].](images/book-3d.png)

In the cognitive view, the metaphor performs a number of "conventional
mappings from one domain to another" [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 239]. Lakoff
mentions for example the common trope of "a state is a person," implicit in
the ideas of "friendly" and "hostile" states [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 243].
This metaphor implies that ideas about agency, emotion, and mental life
usually attached to people can be extended to state actors. Similarly, to say
that someone is "boiling mad," instantiates the common trope of "anger is a
hot liquid in a container." In this case, common known properties attached to
the domain of physics are mapped onto the domain of emotion. Lakoff further
explains that such domain mappings tend to follow a few rules. They are
usually partial and asymmetrical. "Mappings are not arbitrary," he writes,
"but grounded in the body and in everyday experience and knowledge." Finally
domain mappings obey what Lakoff calls the Invariance Principle, by which "the
image schema structure of the source domain is projected onto the target
domain in a way that is consistent with inherent target domain
structure."[^ln1-metalakoff]

The kind of resemblances that we have been discussing so far---between the
document and its icon, for example---are further referred to as *structural
metaphors*. "Structural metaphors allow us to do much more than just orient
concepts," Lakoff and Johnson wrote in the 1980s [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 61].
Grounded in "systematic correlations within our experience," structural
metaphors transfer organizing principles from one domain to another. Thus to
say "the world is our oyster" is to suggest that something in our approach to
interacting with oysters, likely in a gastronomical situation, resembles our
approach to life [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 65-8]. The ease of eating one
transfers to the ease of living the other. The transferred property implies a
not just a semantic similarity, one of meaning, but a structural one, one of
interface. The metaphor suggests the world is arranged like an oyster somehow,
that it can be cracked, and that it contains a tasty hidden morsel within. In
this way, structural metaphors organize one thing in the shape of another.
They are a tool for extending insights from a known domain to lesser known
one, a tool for exploration: simple things like oysters shed light on complex
things like worlds.

In their capacity for exploration and explanation, metaphor machines present
us with a special case of conceptual domain blending. The transference of
structuring principles from one system to another---from "physical libraries"
to "electronic workstations environments," in our case---reveals the formative
nature of the structural metaphor. Metaphors that can be touched and handled
in some way exist neither wholly in language nor wholly in the mind. Rather,
they operate in action, at hand. John Carrol, one of the pioneers in the field
of human-computer interaction, summarized the role of metaphors in the design
of computing systems as follows:

> Professional programmers might learn a new system X by metaphorizing at
least initially from what they already know about system Y. More casual or
naive end-users might rely on metaphors drawn from more distant knowledge
domains, e.g. on what they have already learned about electric typewriters.
The implications of this proposal are simple and direct. If people employ
metaphors in learning about computing systems, the designers of those systems
should anticipate and support likely metaphorical constructions to increase
the ease of learning and using the system [@carroll_metaphor_1982, 107-108].

In essence, Carroll imagines human-computer interfaces that enact Lakoff and
Johnson's "conceptual blending" in practice. In this way, the familiar gesture
of discarding a crumpled piece of paper into the waste bin can be simulated
digitally to guide the deletion of electronic documents.

Apple's influential *Human Interface Guidelines*, at the core of Apple's
desktop interfaces in the 1980s and today, echoes Carroll's proscriptions:

> You can take advantage of people's knowledge of the world around them by
using metaphors to convey concepts and features of your application. Use
metaphors involving concrete, familiar ideas and make the metaphors plain, so
that users have a set of expectations to apply to computer environments.  For
example, people often use folders to store paper documents in their offices.
Therefore, it makes sense to people to store computer documents in
computer-generated folders that look like files and folders. People can
organize their hard disks in a way that's analogous to the way they organize
their file cabinets [@apple_apple_1987, 4].

Apple's designers understood that the mapping of concepts between the physical
and the computer-generated worlds is imperfect. For example, unlike a
real-world file folder, constrained by the size of its containing cabinet, a
computer folder can hold a nearly unlimited amount of files. Or, to be more
precise, the electronic folder metaphor is subject to different constraints
than those that limit the use of paper files. The image of a paper file should
not therefore limit the possibilities of the metaphor's implementation, the
manual explains. It further advises its readers to "strike a balance between
the metaphor's suggested use and the ability of the computer to support and
extend the metaphor" [@apple_apple_1987, 5]. The domain blending property of
the embodied structural metaphor is not perfect, in other words. Some parts
map from the real world to the virtual, while others do not.

A number of patents from IBM, Xerox, and Microsoft similarly evoke the logics
of structural metaphor and domain blending. Consider US Patent #5,907,854 by
Paula J. Cox et.al. of International Business Machines. The invention
describes "a library metaphor that allows a user to organize the online books
in a manner that has meaning and utility." The authors continue to explain
that "while the actual books may be stored in many separate and distinct
locations [...] the bookcase provides a familiar classification system."
Further, they write that the creation of bookcase metaphors must involve "the
creation of appropriate links to the actual online book/bookshelf/bookcase."
The "book metaphor" ultimately "provides an easy to understand and intuitive
model for a user who might not be familiar with on-line viewing tools"
[@cox_method_1999].

Another metaphor machine can be found in the collaboration between the
influential product design firm IDEO and Xerox in the 1990s. The two worked on
an early file manager shell called PC Catalog, later renamed TabWorks. In
describing the design process, IDEO developers wrote about defining "key
elements of the metaphor" contained in the image of "tabs" and "catalogs."
"The book *cover*," they wrote, "opened to display three *rings* binding a set
of divider *tabs*, each containing one or more *pages*." Pages, in turn
contained *items* or "icons representing documents or applications"
[@moll-carrillo_articulating_1995, 1-7]. In a similar binder-based software
application, the engineers at IBM describe the "contents of the notebook
metaphor," which are "displayed as a stack of sheets." "The interface [...]
permits a user to directly manipulate the sheets in the notebook metaphor."
[@glaser_graphical_1995]. In these words we begin to to glimpse the trouble
with the structural metaphor paradigm of human-interface design. The idea of
"direct manipulation" refers to the im-mediate access to the metaphor, that is,
paradoxically, the appearance of access without mediation---the occlusion of
the document in favor of its representation. The issue of apparent immediacy
will continue to haunt our conversation for the rest of the chapter.

## Dissimulation

Readers know what paragraphs, pages, files, and folders can do on paper and
would like for digital images of paper to behave in a similar way. The
principles of metaphor-driven design contain an implicit model of
human-computer interaction, which suggests that humans prefer to manipulate
digital information stored on computational media by the means of familiar
mediating structures---paragraphs, pages, files, and folders---associated
figuratively with the affordances of print media. For example, one affordance
of paper is that it can be folded. It therefore becomes possible to "earmark"
a page by folding a corner. The fold enables subsequent recollection of text
that was read previously. By these means, a reader marks a notable place in
the text in order to return to it later. Patently, digital media cannot (as of
yet) fold by the way of paper. Readers seeking a mechanism for digital
recollection may not be familiar with the affordances of newly inhabited
medium. Consequently, the affordances of digital media are presented through
metaphor. Thus a virtual "earmark" on a "page" represents a numerical pointer
to a specific address in the computer memory. A "page" stands for a range of
related addresses that correspond roughly to the information visible on an
analogous page in print. Similarly, one "drops a folder into a trash bin" or
"drags and drops a file" or "bookmarks a page" on a screen. Such metaphors
rely on habituated insight with one medium extended into another. We do not
literally "drag" or "drop" bits, but we use metaphors of paper and trashcans
to help us manipulate bits and bytes as if they were household objects. The
metaphor opens figurative possibilities. It also obscures the actual physical
contingencies of interacting with bits and bytes, logic gates and magnetic
traces.

The affordances of physical media differ from those of the simulated. We
handle bits and bytes differently from files and folders, pages and
paragraphs. The metaphorical substitution encourages readers to extend the
facility they have with handling one sort of media (paper and ink) to another
(screen and pixels). What readers gain in facility, they lose in critical
faculty. Alienated from the material conditions of information storage and
retrieval, readers gain access to the metaphor alone. Thus we go through the
motions of "turning the page" but in actuality redraw the screen. We
"highlight a passage," which constitutes an action that may also send
information about the highlighted passage to a data aggregation service. We
"share a book" which really means assigning a temporary license to another
user. Where does the text go? I ask when downloading a paper from an online
journal.[^ln1-nested] It is in your home folder someone answers. But unless
one of us is familiar with the material contingencies of file storage, neither
has a mental map of any physical location corresponding to the "home"
directory (same as folder), the default location of personal files on many
systems. When confronted with the actual affordances of digital text, the user
grasps for neutered metaphors. We "reside" in such "homes," "own," "share,"
and "create" only in the simulacrum.

Metaphors of human-computer interaction conceal structures of computational
governance and control over the transmission of knowledge and information.
Print offers a relatively static and stable medium by comparison. Ink and
paper do not change much in transit. By contrast, the vessels of computation
are capable of altering their contents dynamically. Imagine me asking you to
read Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for example, in lending you a copy of the text.
In the case of a paper book, I may be sure that the text in my hands will
remain the same as I pass it into yours. But the computed sign also has the
capability to adjust itself to new contexts. For example, the simulated
*Hamlet* may adapt to the new reader's geographic location, mood, or
consumption habits. In fact, most texts we consume today come to us in such
computationally constructed way. The front page of the New York Times viewed
in Beijing will differ from that viewed in New York. The two "pages" or
"sites" are in some sense two completely different textual variants. In
another sense, the "front page" identifies the same location of the same text,
in two diverging and dynamically composed versions. Whatever is meant by
"today's edition of the New York Times" in that sense denotes differing
surface phenomena that emanate from the same source.

The key to understanding "the loss of resemblances" that accompanies
ubiquitous simulation lies in the inner dynamics of metaphor machinery. A
functioning metaphor, if you would recall from Lakoff, is one which transfers
the structural properties of one domain into another. Thus to say "life is a
stage" is to transpose something about theater onto life. In literary terms,
the theater is "tenor" where "life" is "vehicle" of the composite figure
[@richards_philosophy_1936]. Simulations work differently. Where the tenor of
the literary metaphor crosses several semantic and cognitive domains, the
computational metaphor substitutes the "signs of the real for the real"
[@baudrillard_simulacra_1994, 2]. It is a subtle difference that engenders
not-so-subtle effects. For example, it is one thing to say "you are the apple
of my eye" and quite another to confuse apples for eye pupils. Baudrillard
gives us the example of a map that no longer corresponds to any territory. He
calls such a condition of pure simulation without a referent *hyper-reality*.

Hyperreality emanates from the expected correspondence between digital
representation and the thing being represented. For example, one expects
weather simulation to model actual observed meteorological conditions. But
would it be a weather simulation if the model was broken in some way, or, in
the extreme, if it had no correspondence to the physics of clouds, wind, and
water whatsoever? The hyperreal breaks further still by taking place of
instead of the underlying reality. A model does not merely obscure, it usurps
the thing being modeled. It begins to simulate itself, according to its own
rules, similar to self. The simulation no longer corresponds to any situation
"on the ground." Severed from its referent, representation attains the status
of the thing represented. Therefore hyper-reality: a map of a map, a symbol
that folds onto itself, a weather simulation confused for weather.

We know that physical affordances of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and
magnetic storage differ drastically from those of paper, goat skins, or
parchment. Yet digital surface representation maintains the illusion of
self-similarity. We are faced with what is called *skeuomorphic* design, by
which screen reading resembles print. In this way, an electronic book reader
mimics the bent corner of a well-thumbed book. The skeuomorphic resemblance
constitutes a metaphor worthy of critical examination. The principles of
skeuomorphic design extend a visual metaphor from one medium to another. The
reader already knows how to turn pages of a book. A book device therefore
simulates pages to ease the cognitive burden of transitioning from paper to
pixel. Instead of issuing arcane commands meant for the machine to turn the
page, readers perform the more habituated motion of swiping across the screen.
The gliding motion enacts a kinetic analogy---a type of a metaphor---as if to
transpose properties of paper to glass.

Our grasp on the medium weakens the more convincing the simulacrum. By
definition, simulation "assumes a form resembling that of something else,"
whereby one referent is exchanged for another [@_simulation_2015]. To drag and
drop a document into a trashcan on the screen, for example, should in theory
correspond to an analogous set of data manipulations on the disk. Yet,
"discarding a file" in this manner does not necessarily include deletion of
data from the storage medium, as expected. The representation of the document
may disappear visually where the inscription endures. Such "loss of
resemblances" could remain insignificant. Does one care whether a file was
actually erased or not when performing deletion? Perhaps not. But in some
cases, when it really matters---under the threat of censorship or prosecution,
for example---the incongruence exposes the frailty of our alienation from the
material contexts of digital knowledge production. Under duress, one may
demand the thing to stay deeply deleted. The problem of metaphoric immediacy
reappears in the unfulfilled promise of mimesis. The poet and the critic may
celebrate the free play of the signifier where the journalist or the accused
would not. In many contexts, the metaphoric vehicle claims to bridge domains
and to ferry content across, faithfully, without meddling, or damaging its
contents. But, if the metaphor does meddle---if it mediates while dissembling
and dissimulating---by what process of authentication can one ensure the
efficacy of transference? What entity makes good on the promise of
verisimilitude?

All readers ultimately bear the burden of conceptual transference. In
pretending to turn virtual pages, we lose sight of the mechanisms that give
rise to dissimulation. If we hope to practice anything like interpretation or
close reading at the level of discourse, we must certainly also practice them
at the physical site of discourse production. A truly materialist poetics
would reach through the representation towards the medium. More than
superficial embellishment, the skeuomorphic metaphor enacted at the surface of
the digital literary device structures all meaning-carrying units: from
individual letters to words, paragraphs, chapters, pages, and books. The
metaphor of "turning the page by swiping across the screen" conceals the
structural rift between media: between supple pages and rigid slabs of glass
and silicone.

Why would readers engage in such a charade? Why not simply make use of novel
interfaces afforded by new technology? The literature from the field of
human-computer interaction suggests a formalist answer: habituation
[@carroll_metaphor_1982; @carroll_interface_1987; @spolsky_user_2001]. The
initial effort it takes to learn to read in a new environment may discourage
potential readers from adopting new technology. Smart designers therefore rely
on acculturated practice, the turning of pages in our case, to minimize the
"friction" of adoption. Although an "electronic book reader" contains no pages
as such, it extends the metaphor of pages to electronic reading. The perceived
facility of use comes at a cost of critical engagement. A digital poem, a
novel, a physician's script, or a legal contract resembles their paper
counterparts, in order to enable familiar actions. But while imitating paper
pages, the reading appliance also monitors, adjusts, warns, and controls.
These are the realities of contemporary reading practice that have yet to be
included into our theories and practices of interpretation.

Dissimulation conceals structuring principles large and small. Some of the
occluded details remain inconsequential, like the limit on how many keys can
be pressed at once without overwhelming the circuitry of the keyboard when
typing. Other concealed details are of paramount importance, like digital
rights management chips and censorship filters, for example. Electronic books
are governed and internalize governing structures in ways that are often
purposefully hidden from the reader. For example, the US Digital Millennium
Copyright Act prohibits the physical circumvention of copyright protections
[@ku_critique_2004; @ginsburg_legal_2005; @perzanowski_rethinking_2008;
@fry_circumventing_2009; @von_lohmann_unintended_2010]. This means that if an
electronic book is encrypted in some way to prevent copyright infringement,
the reader may also be prevented from examining codes and codices embedded
into the device---rules governing accessibility, preservation, or freedom of
speech. The material affordances of inscription at that deep bottom-most
meaning-bearing medium influence all higher-level functions of
interpretation.[^ln1-rmedium]

Extant and still silently dominant theories of interpretation continue to
build on properties and assumptions attached to print media. For example, in
Hans-Georg Gadamer's influential conception of art, the free play of the
artistic mind transforms into material structure [*Gebilde*] that is both
"repeatable" and "permanent" [@gadamer_truth_1975, 110]. Similarly, in his
*Interpretation Theory*, Paul Ricoeur writes about the "range of social and
political changes" related to the invention of writing. For Ricoeur, human
discourse is "fixed" and thereby "preserved from destruction" in writing
[@ricur_interpretation_1976, 26-8]. The electronic literary device offers no
such permanence. What is meant by "fixed," "permanent," and "repeatable"
changes with the device. Such properties come to us under the guise of surface
representation. Nothing is guaranteed in the passage of electronic text from
one pair of hands into another. Formatting expands its purview far beyond
typographical convention. The erasure of words, word substitution, automatic
summarization, wholesale generation of discourse by algorithmic means---the
command and control layer of a digital media device contains all such
possibilities. What does it mean to read and to interpret a dynamic text,
which changes depending on its context? How can literary analysis---close
reading, philology, hermeneutics---persist without the fixity of print?

Consider the commonplace task of "turning pages" when writing or reading
digital texts. In cognitive linguistic terms, the idea of paper pages should
somehow extend into the domain of manipulating digital information. In
literary terms, the projection of a page on the screen carries the tenor of
paper pagination. By these means, the turning of simulated pages implies a
certain familiar arrangement of matter. Readers know what to do with paper
pages. They understand the affordances involved. The metaphor encourages
readers to extend their knowledge of the physical world into the projected,
virtual. For example, paper pages can be turned; we know they usually proceed
one another, sequentially; and we are attuned to expect the same attributes to
hold true in the vehicle---the domain receiving the tenor of the metaphor. The
turning of virtual pages should, in theory, set off a series of corresponding
actions in the target, digital domain. Turning the page on a screen should
correspond to a similar action on the disk. But the action does not
necessarily meet our expectations. The arrangement of information stored on
the disk affords different physical actions from the arrangement of
information on the page. For example, an English-language character occupies
eight bits on a disk where a print character occupies one. The disk can
tolerate millions of rewrites, where the paper medium wears out after only a
few. The paper inscription is visible to the naked eye where the digital
inscription is not.

Dissimulation is perhaps necessary, because the reading and writing of digital
data can involve processes far outside of everyday experience. For example, in
reading data from solid state (FLASH) memory a circuit imparts electrical
charge through quantum tunneling onto a connected series of floating gate
transistors [@pavan_flash_1997; @bez_introduction_2003].

![Formal structures at the site of the inscription. "Perspective view of a
portion of a charge translating device illustrating a preferred electrical
contact arrangement. A quantum of charge carriers, representing an information
bit [...] can be translated along the semiconductor [...] sweeping the
minority carriers with it. The quantum can be detected by a simple capacitive
couple, e.g., a floating gate FET"
[@boyle_information_1974].](images/floating-gate.png)

Whatever the complexities of solid state storage architecture, the difference
in arrangement of information between pages and floating gates---at the root
of modern "sold state" storage---is apparent. The structure of one has only an
arbitrary connection to the structure of the other. Consequently changes in
the structure of the symbolic domain, which manifest in the erasure of words
for example, do not necessitate corresponding changes in the physical, which
in the same example manifest in the discharge of the floating gate. The
information endures despite intended erasure. The dwellers of virtual realms
believe in verisimilitude. We hope the analogy of turning the page or erasing
a word on the screen to entail similar actions on the disk. But we also lose
faith when asked to verify the illusion. Under scrutiny, data is sometimes
simply omitted from view. At other times it multiplies and perseveres across
deep surfaces, shared without consent with agents not privy to the original
contexts of inscription. As was the case with Baudrillard's map, the metaphor
breaks in that it no longer reflects any terrain. Dissimulation mimics the
familiar but absent affordances of the print artifact. It suggests a
structuring of one kind, while enacting the structure of another.

In these novel conditions, the task of the literary scholar must include,
among other things, a practice of microscopic reading that corresponds to the
techniques of micromolecular writing, suggested already in Kittler and
Baudrillard in the 1990s [@kittler_there_1995]. I imagine here the inverse of
Kittler's literature without humans: cryptic, illegible, and under the
conditions of high technology. The methodology of computational poetics
insists on recovering the shape of the inscription, across surfaces and
domains, making the full extent of the dissimulating figure available for
interpretation. What happens in the metaphorical transference between a book
as an object of art and the apparatus simulating that object? Estrangement,
the exegesis of the metaphor, can help reveal the mechanisms of governance in
the structural transference between one medium to another. Materialist poetics
can subsequently allow one to consent, or, conversely, resist elements of
imposed structure. That is not to say that meaning-making structures can ever
become fully transparent or produce plain, unambiguous meaning. Unlike a
cypher, the plain text is one that does not preclude the possibility of
interpretation or misinterpretation. In the continuum between legibility and
total illegibility, the texts we read today occupy a space somewhere right of
center. They are illegible in part. The simulation of print, the digital
metaphor, decays rapidly with time. Archivists know this problem well: digital
texts from recent past can quickly become inaccessible as the software used to
decode them itself passes into oblivion.

## Death and Incongruence

In poetics, a metaphor is said to be "motivated" when a set of concepts from
one domain extends into another to produce insight [@lakoff_contemporary_1998,
210-1]. For example, Lakoff explains: that to say "to spin one's wheels" when
referring to someone who is thinking, is to apply the reader's knowledge of
automobiles to the mental realm. Wheels that spin without moving the car
forward waste energy. The metaphor suggests that something similar happens
mentally as well [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 211]. A metaphor in a figurative
genre like prose or poetry suggests novel and hitherto unexplored connections
between domains. In his influential essay on metaphor the English literary
critic I.A. Richards wrete that "when we use metaphor we have two thoughts of
different things active together and supported by a single word, or phrase,
whose meaning is a resultant of their interaction" [@richards_philosophy_1936,
95]. Richards's radical contribution to the study of metaphor lay in the
observation that metaphor operates in language, thought, and action
ubiquitously. It does not, as previously thought, exist merely in the realm of
poetic language. Thought in itself, Richards believed, is metaphoric in that
the mind continually searches for patterns and comparisons
[@richards_philosophy_1936, 94]. The motivated metaphor produces insight: a
tool to explore and to make sense of the world. By such means the known sheds
light onto the unknown.

Some metaphors are, in this way, more productive than others. The poetic use
of the metaphor does not merely carry meaning across known domains, it
produces new and unexpected connections between them. To this effect, Richards
cites the poet Percy Shelley who wrote the following in defense of poetry:

> [poetic] language is vitally metaphorical; that is, it marks the before
> unapprehended relations of things and perpetuates their apprehension, until
> the words which represent them, become, through time, signs for portions or
> classes of thoughts instead of pictures of integral thoughts; and then if no
> new poets should arise to create afresh the associations which have been
> thus disorganized, language will be dead to all the nobler purposes of human
> intercourse [@shelley_essays_1840].

In this, Shelley anticipated what the cognitive school of metaphor theory was
to confirm by empirical means more than a century later
[@mojtabai_delusion_2000; @billig_metaphor_2005]. Metaphors do not "die" as
such. They continue to live, but also become naturalized: that is understood
literally. They create connections that with time become habituated and
invisible to their users. In other words, taken for literal truth, the
metaphor loses its quality of mediation of ferrying across. For example, for
many readers the idea of a "dead metaphor" itself may no longer evoke death.
Perhaps they understand the "death" of the "dead metaphors" to function
synonymously with "convention" or "idiom" without the gruesome connotations
that accompany the end of biological life.[^ln1-dead] The metaphor withers
once connotation is lost. What was once a novel explanatory connection between
two domains becomes the denotative, in the ordinary sense---a platitude. In
Shelley's view, all metaphors are destined to become habituated in this way,
only to be reborn again in poetry. In their most generative form, metaphors
actively produce new meaning. The creative juxtaposition between two as before
unrelated conceptual domains brings new aspects of experience to light. But
with time, the poetic metaphor degrades into a tired cliché. It no longer
"perpetuates understanding." It dies in a sense of becoming a mere shortcut to
understanding. In Viktor Shklovsky's words, we "cease to experience" the
trope. The metaphor "dries up" when we begin recognizing it without
apprehension [@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914]. It no longer generates new
connections between domains, but merely reinforces existing ones. Vilem
Flusser put it another way, in writing that habituated idiom proceeds
"smoothly," giving us no pause, without "bumps or interruptions"
[@flusser_freedom_2003, 13 and 82].

Lakoff famously took exception with the idea of dead metaphors, arguing that
even those metaphors that are thoroughly habituated still play a vital part in
structuring everyday experience. He gave the example of the sentence: *He
still can't quite grasp the basic ideas of quantum mechanics*. Grasping in
this case is used as a synonym to "understanding." It indicates a transference
of properties between physical action (grasping) and mental action
(understanding). Despite being a cliché, the metaphor is alive in a sense,
Lakoff argues, because it continues to perform a function, naming a mental
activity that we would otherwise find difficult to explain with precision.
Such a metaphor is less dead than other, perhaps more novel, "one off" poetic
tropes that fail to circulate widely. The metaphor dies in the sense of being
overused, but it dies also in another sense for not being used at all.

A truly dead metaphor for Lakoff is one in which the original source image no
longer makes sense. He gives the example of the English word *pedigree*, which
originally referred to the French for "crane's foot," or *pied de grue*. The
foot was used in a typographical flourish to decorate centuries-old
family-tree diagrams. In the previous example, when we spoke of the
metaphorical "grasping" of ideas, both sides of the domain transference were
readily available to us. We understood something about grasping things and
extended it to the capacity of the mind to take hold of ideas. By contrast,
the *pied de grue* contained within the English *pedigree* is no longer
accessible to the average speaker. In the first case the metaphor is merely
tired, where it is completely dead in the other. All habituated metaphors like
"grasping" and "pedigree" lose their symbolic connotations in use. But unlike
"pedigree," the metaphorical nature of "grasping ideas" is at least available
for casual interpretation. The underlying metaphor THE MIND IS LIKE A HAND
generates other meaningful phrases like "you have to *let go* of this idea."
The crane's foot in the English "pedigree" has stopped generating new
metaphors. The conventional notion of dead metaphors does not appropriately
differentiate between the two cases [@lakoff_death_1987;
@muller_metaphors_2008]. The metaphor sometimes "dies" but continues to
perform its function of intuitively connecting two disparate domains. At other
times, the metaphor dies in the sense of one domain becoming no longer
accessible to its user. Furthermore, we might add that a wholly unmotivated
metaphor does no work at all. Thus the Mad Hatter poses his famous nonsensical
riddle in Lewis Carroll's *Alice in Wonderland*: How is a raven like a writing
desk? The complete dissimilarity between the two domains---of animals and
furniture---prevents any productive congruence.[^ln1-carroll] No domain
mapping happens between ravens and writing desks. Not having been born, the
metaphor dies in yet another sense.

With these comments on broken and dead metaphors in mind, we may ask: To what
extent does the interface metaphor live or die by the above definitions? When
discarding a document into a trash bin, in our recurring example, users should
theoretically map their knowledge of paper documents and paper waste baskets
onto the computational domain. The icon should work similarly to the object it
purports to simulate. Instead, the *idea* of discarding something substitutes
for the *material reality* of the corresponding action. The concept blends not
with another conceptual domain but with the material affordances of the target
medium. Such material affordances---our ability to actually discard data, for
example---stand in an arbitrary relationship to the source domain.  Simply
put, we expect the thing to be deleted, but it is not. This incongruence
breaks Lakoff's Invariance Principle. Whatever structural changes we expect to
happen in the source domain do not carry over to the target. The metaphor
breaks almost as badly as the transference between desks and ravens.  The
appearance of taking out the trash without the corresponding erasure of data
becomes a dead metaphor even under Lakoff's strict definitions. As was the
case with the "crane's foot" in the English "pedigree," the user of the
simulated document dustbin is missing one part of the metaphor equation.
Where in the case of "pedigree" English speakers fail to grasp the source or
the tenor of the metaphoric substitution, the case of the virtual dustbin is
missing the target, or the vehicle of the action. Discarding a document into
the virtual trash bin does not in fact correspond to a similar action in the
target domain of the storage medium. In either case, in failing to achieve the
full transference between source and target domains the metaphor ceases to
function properly, by definition [@lakoff_death_1987]. The interface metaphor
fails to achieve motivation. The material realities of the metaphor are not
simply missing, they are misrepresented. The analogy between discarding paper
and erasing bits breaks down in the worst possible way.

## Mimesis

"An interface is by nature a form of artistic imitation: a *mimesis*," Brenda
Laurel wrote in her important 1984 essay "Interface as Mimesis." She went on
to write that "if designing interfaces feels like painting on cave walls by
flickering torchlight, it is only because we, the designers, have not availed
ourselves of better illumination: the science of the mimetic arts, poetics"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 67]. Laurel, who started her academic career
in theater studies, went on to work for companies like Apple, Activision,
Atari, and Sun Microsystems. Her work, cited in more than 120 technical
patents, reminds us of the close link between poetics and the design of
human-computer interaction. It is all the more important today, as immersive
computational environments begin to structure experience beyond the merely
instrumental. Computers mediate in the interface between the public and the
private, between art and politics, and between forces of capital and control.
The simulacrum requires that we advance a reflective "science of the mimetic
arts" lest we lose a sense of what Michael Taussig has called the space
ulterior to mimesis [@taussig_mimesis_1993, 129-144]. In other words, the
suspension of disbelief must remain, as it was in Samuel Coleridge's original
formulation, a *willful* act, containing further a "semblance of truth"
required to animate the shadows of imagination [@coleridge_biographia_1917,
6-7]. An involuntary or worse yet forced suspension of disbelief can only lead
to total critical disempowerment.

Before the 1980s, the dominant paradigm of interacting with machines was the
dialog [@shaw_joss:_1964; @cameron_dialog:_1967; @gaines_timesharing_1986;
@martin_computerized_1970; @martin_design_1973]. Already in 1950, Alan Turing
imagined a conversation between a critic and an artificially intelligent poet:

>`Interrogator:` In the first line of your sonnet which reads "Shall I compare
thee to a summer's day," would not "a spring day" do as well or better?  
>`Witness:` It wouldn't scan.  
>`Interrogator:` How about "a winter's day," That would scan all right.  
>`Witness:` Yes, but nobody wants to be compared to a winter's day.  
>`Interrogator:` Would you say Mr. Pickwick reminded you of Christmas?  
>`Witness: In a way.  
>`Interrogator:` Yet Christmas is a winter's day, and I do not think Mr. Pickwick
would mind the comparison.  
>`Witness:` I don't think you're serious. By a winter's day one means a typical
winter's day, rather than a special one like Christmas
[@turing_computing_1950].

The goal of conversational programming was to provide a similarly naturalized
dialog between the operator and the machine. Although machine understanding of
informal human speech does not develop in earnest until the twenty-first
century, interactive computing environments like DIALOG and JOSS attempted to
abstract away from machine language towards interfaces that understood a
limited number of English words. JOSS, an experimental on-line computing
system created by the RAND corporation in 1963, consisted of a typewriter
connected to the JOHNNIAC computer. Prior to JOSS, programmers would interact
with the JOHNNIAC machine via keyboard and punch card, initially using octal
number notation and then binary assembly language [@gruenberger_history_1979].
These methods of programming were time consuming and prone to error. "An octal
desk calculator was nice to have," a historian of the system would later quip
[@gruenberger_history_1979, 58]. The JOSS experiment was meant to introduce a
kind of an interpreter that sat between the human operator and the machine,
facilitating communication in a friendly, English-like language. Think of JOSS
as the "user's computing aide and a single contact with the computer," the
engineers wrote [@shaw_joss:_1964, 456]. Instead of feeding punch cards into a
machine, the operator would now use a standard typewriter. Instead of flipping
switches the operator typed words. JOSS thus referred both to the "simple
language" for machine instruction and to this new "remote console" way of
interacting with the computer. JOSS and the user would "take turns controlling
the typewriter" in the words of the documentation. The computerized aide
understood simple commands like `do`, `go`, and `type`.  Given a number of
predetermined commands, it would attempt to respond with a result. When
confused, or when given an unfamiliar command, its default for an unspecified
error mimicked human confusion: "Eh? [@shaw_joss:_1964]"

This mode of conversational interaction was captured also in one of the
earliest text adventure games, the *Colossal Cave Adventure*, designed by Will
Crowther in 1975 [@montfort_twisty_2003]. The following dialog illustrates the
call-and-response game play typical of the genre:

> `You are standing at the end of a road before a small brick building. Around
you is a forest. A small stream flows out of the building and down a gully.`
>
>`> enter`
>
> `You are inside a building, a well house for a large spring. There are some
keys on the ground here. There is a shiny brass lamp nearby. There is food
here. There is a bottle of water here.`
>
>`> get keys`
>
> `OK`
>
>`> get lamp`
>
> `OK`
>
>`> exit`
>
> `You're at end of road again.`

Although much more accessible and interactive than communication in octal or
binary machine code, the conversational model posed several significant
downsides. While resembling human communication, it in fact used only a
limited set of words. Researchers from the U.S. Air Force academy would later
write:

> The lower cost of computer access and the proliferation of on-line systems
produced a new breed of users, people whose expertise was in some area other
than computer technology. As their initial fascination with conversational
computing wore off, users reported experiencing feelings of intense
frustration and of being "manipulated" by a seemingly unyielding, rigid,
intolerant dialogue partner [@walther_-line_1974, 379;
@gaines_timesharing_1986, 15].

The conversational intermediary of the Colossal Cave Adventure understood
roughly 295 commands, and knew about 1,600 words in response arranged into
several hundred canned phrases.[^ln1-count] Faced with an unfamiliar word, it
could only repeat "That's not a verb I recognise."

[^ln1-count]: Rick Adams maintains the source code for a number of early
versions of the game at http://rickadams.org/adventure/e_downloads.html.  I
used PDP-10 Fortran version and ran `tr`, `uniq`, and the `wc` Unix utilities
to isolate and count the unique words from the data file.

By the 1980s, a new breed of metaphorical interfaces gained widespread
prominence. If *Colossal Cave Adventure* epitomized the conversational model
of computing, games like the early but popular *Pong*, *Space Invaders*, and
*Donkey Kong* epitomized the paradigm of "direct manipulation." According to
Ben Shneiderman, the researcher who coined the term in 1982, direct
manipulation involved three key principles:

1. Continuous representation of the object of interest.
2. Physical actions or labelled button presses instead of complex syntax.
3. Rapid incremental reversible operations whose impact on the object of
interest is immediately visible [@shneiderman_future_1982, 251;
@hutchins_direct_1986, 91].

The goal of direct manipulation was therefore to achieve a perfect
correspondence between "representation" and the "object of interest."
Shneiderman cites Gottfried Leibniz in reference to symbolic notation, which
in theory should also "express the exact nature of a thing briefly and, as it
were, picture it." For Leibniz, the symbol, an exact and portable picture of
an idea, could subsequently diminish the mental effort required for abstract
thought, leading to a "great advantage for discovery"
[@leibniz_briefwechsel_1899, 375; @shneiderman_direct_1983, 57]. The calculus
of Leibniz and his symbolic notation allowed mathematicians to represent
infinitely small and infinitely large numbers in print---ideas that would not
fit on the page or in the mind otherwise [@cajori_history_1923;
@thurston_leibnizs_1973; @grabiner_is_1974]. For Shneiderman and others, a
computer game like *Pong* similarly enabled the direct manipulation of complex
abstractions, allowing a player to control a virtual table-tennis paddle by
rotating a physical knob on a gaming console. The movement of the physical
knob corresponded directly to the movement of the paddle---clockwise for up
and counter-clockwise for down---thus achieving the correspondence between
"operation" and the "impact on the object of interest"
[@shneiderman_direct_1983, 60]. Without such a "direct" linkage, the physics
of the game simulation would be too complex for players to handle effectively,
if they were asked to play by writing formulas in code, for example, or to
direct the paddle through dialog.

The conversational model of human-computer interaction was hindered by what
researchers considered an arbitrary symbolic relationship of the sign to its
signifier. In this way, when using *EMACS*, a text editor commonly found on
UNIX systems of the time, one would enter the command `k` in combination with
other keys to delete or to "kill" a file, while on other systems, Shneiderman
complained, `k` stood for "keep a file," the opposite from killing it
[@shneiderman_direct_1983, 65]. In the conversational model, the command stood
in an arbitrary relationship to the intended effect, whereas in the direct
manipulation model the knob and the movement of the paddle related
mimetically. To be more precise, the direct manipulation paradigm advocated
for an "iconic" relationship between representation and the object of interest
[@norman_user_1986, 110]. Like onomatopoeic words, the movement of the knob
resembles the movement of the thing it represents. Edwin Hutchins, Donald
Norman, and James Hollan write: "There is an economy here in that the user's
knowledge of the structure of the surface acoustical form has a non-arbitrary
relationship to meaning [...] The same sort of thing can be done in the design
of interface languages" [@norman_cognitive_1991, 123]. An iconic image
requires no explanation; it is intuitive.[^ln1-icon] Instead of searching for
the right command the user relies on the habituated affordances of real-world
objects, like table tennis paddles and paper trashcans, to manipulate virtual
objects, like computer games and file systems. The move between
"conversational" and "direct" interaction models could in this way be
explained as a shift from a system of symbolic signs which stand in arbitrary
relationship to their referents to a system of iconic signs that stand in a
mimetic relationship.[^ln1-peirce]

[^ln1-icon]: I am using the traditional Peircian distinction between symbol,
icon, and index. Peirce writes "icons are are so completely substituted for
their objects as hardly to be distinguished from them" [@peirce_algebra_1992,
226].

[^ln1-peirce]: Charles Sanders Peirce, a philosopher of language whose
vocabulary I have been using here, suggests Simulacra as a possible synonym
for Icon, citing also Plato's *Phaedrus* in relation to the Greek `ὁμοίωμα` or
imitation [@peirce_excerpts_1998, 481; @plato_plato:_1999, 250a-b].

Crucially, within the "direct manipulation" paradigm, the full immersion in
the mimetic context of the virtual object is aimed at the suspension of
disbelief [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 76]. Through use, the mimetic icon
usurps the "object of interest." The "directness" of direct manipulation in
fact constitutes only an illusion of directness. Recall in this regard the
Heideggerian insight into the nature of tool use. In *Being and Time*,
Heidegger writes about the particular *handiness* of a tool, like a hammer. He
writes, "the less we stare at the thing [...] the more actively we use it, the
more original our relation to it becomes and the more undisguisedly it is
encountered as what it is, a useful thing" [@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. For
Heidegger, there was no way to understand a tool like a hammer theoretically,
by detached reflection. One must understand it through use, in what he called
*circumspection* [*Umsicht*]---the awareness of the object ready-to-hand
[*zuhanden*] [@heidegger_sein_1967, 69]. We relate to the tool in the process
of using it; it comes into focus at the periphery of tool use
[@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. The metaphoric device frustrates the Heideggerian
vision of technology that reveals. At hand, the device takes shape as a
keyboard, a mouse, or a touch screen. But in the mind, as a simulation, it
dissembles to behave like a page, a folder, or a wastepaper bin. The tool---a
keyboard or a touch screen---is not encountered for what it is. Nor does a
simulated tool reveal anything about the material it affects. The simulation
produces knowledge neither about the thing being simulated (paper or books,
for example) nor about the medium giving rise to the simulation (computational
device, in our example).

The simulation is rather designed to conceal the mediated nature of virtual
experience. It manufactures what Laurel and others call an "interactive
mimesis" and "first personness," the experience of "directly living and acting
within the world established by the computer" [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986;
@norman_user_1986, 490-1]. Hutchins, Hollan, and Norman write: "when an
interface presents world of action rather than a language of description,
manipulating a representation can have the same effects and the same feel as
manipulating the thing being represented" [@hutchins_direct_1986, 98-99].
Similar to Heidegger's distinction between practice and theory, the theorists
of direct manipulation differentiate between action and description. Unlike
Heidegger, who thought about tools at hand, direct manipulation theory
imagines the handling of representations not objects---as evidenced by the
somewhat strained language of metaphor machines in which "hierarchies allow
access to metaphors within the library" and "users manipulate sheets in the
notebook metaphor" [@pajak_electronic_1992; @glaser_graphical_1995]. The
actual instruments enabling the manipulation of image or word on the screen
disappear entirely, giving rise to the immersive, interactive, first-person
experience, without the feeling of mediation. "The user of a well-designed
*model world* interface can willfully suspend disbelief that the objects
depicted are artifacts of some program and can thereby directly engage the
world of the objects," Norman et.al. write [@hutchins_direct_1986, 99]. In
this view, the dialogic model of tool use encouraged by *Colossal Cave
Adventure*---get keys, get lamp---is dismissed as nothing more than just
"using the computer" [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 74]. "End users are not
interested in *making* representations," Laurel writes. "They want to move
around *inside* one," favoring the mimetic context over their actual, physical
surroundings [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75]. Verbal representations, like
"get keys" or "get lamp," puncture the first-person illusion. By contrast, the
fully immersive model supports the "sensation of directness," in which direct,
that is iconic, expressions, "behave in such a way that a user can assume that
they, in some sense, *are* the things they refer to" [@hutchins_direct_1986,
110].

![Direct manipulation of simulated objects, 1984. [@minsky_manipulating_1984,
199]](images/minsky.png)

<!--
!["ViewPoint screen image." On screen menus for the Xerox 6085 Daybreak
workstation, 1985 [@johnson_xerox_1989, 13].](images/xerox_star.png)
-->

The principles of direct interaction emerging in the 1980s stood against what
Laurel called the "ill-formed" presence of the mediator, in the interfaces of
the previous era like JOSS and *Colossal Cave Adventure*. For those advocating
the direct interaction paradigm of computer use, conversational computing
prevented the unmediated "pleasure" and "catharsis" of direct engagement
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75]. The intermediary takes the place of the
player in a game: it swings the sword for her, takes a beating, and reports on
the experience, standing in the way of immediacy. Laurel writes:

> In the file management example, the intermediary takes the form of command
menus that are invoked in order to activate processes in the program that will
create the desired results. The user does not have the experience of pushing
files around, stowing them and grabbing them, or blowing them away. Instead,
the user has the experience of communicating with the file management
intermediary [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75].

In combination, the ideas behind cognitive domain blending and direct
manipulation gave rise to the now ubiquitous WYSIWYG (what you see is what you
get) interfaces, put into mass production by Apple, Xerox, and other companies
in the early- to mid-1980s. The Xerox 8010 Star workstation introduced in 1981
and the Xerox 6085 Daybreak workstation, introduced in 1985, heralded the era
of accessible, metaphor-driven personal computing, characterized by the use of
virtual graphical objects like windows, icons, desktops, folders, and buttons.
The Star and Daybreak workstations were some of the earliest machines to put
the principles of metaphoric domain blending and direct manipulation into
action. The interface was meant to "reveal the structure" of the simulated
objects intuitively, without training or lengthy written explanation. In
Laurel's words, the mimetic interface employed "logic and aesthetics to create
representations that *engage* humans in pleasurable ways"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 85]. The mimetic context is simply "the
experience we desire," Laurel wrote. Direct participation enabled actors to
experience "the full pleasure of the mimetic form"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75].

Designers advocating for direct manipulation understood the trade-offs that
came with an emphasis on such immersive and mimetic experiences
[@hutchins_direct_1986, 118]. Mimesis fundamentally relies on the user's
familiarity with the source domain. In this way, we understand what to do with
"folder" icons because we know how folders behave in real life. Direct mimetic
manipulation does not however tell us anything new about the capabilities of
virtual folders. Immersion precludes critical reflection beyond the
pre-defined confines of the modeled world. The user has access only to what
the simulated experience allows and can provide.

Problematically, ideas behind mimetic immersion contain a kind of a logical
fallacy. The literature on direct manipulation often refers to the example of
driving a car to illustrate the type of an interface by which inputs and
outputs correlate directly. Thus instead of giving complicated commands to a
vehicle, a driver turns the wheel to the right, and the car immediately
follows. A direct causal link exists between the steering wheel and the car's
axle. Similarly, when operating a computer game like *Space Invaders* via a
joystick, the player experiences the immediate correspondence between the
movement of the controlling mechanism and movement of the player-controlled
space ship on the screen. The car is the "direct object of interest" for a
driver, just like the virtual space ship is for a gamer.  But unlike video
game players, authors attempting to delete sensitive information are not
interested in the virtual representation of their documents. The object of
their interest is not mimetic. They would like to erase the document itself,
located somewhere within the machine. In cases like these, inhabitants of the
simulated, virtual world have an interest in objects outside of it. The
paradigm of direct manipulation instead veils the object from view, suspending
the rules of physical interaction in favor of the virtual. Far from being
direct, the iconic representation of the document---the image of a
file---usurps the physical object, the file itself. Where in the
conversational paradigm the nature of the mediation was at hand, open to
circumspection, "direct manipulation" occludes mimesis.

## Speculative Formalism

To what extent do we need to see and understand the mechanisms of the machine
giving rise to the metaphor? In his 1949 paper on "The Genesis and Speed of
Telegraph Codes," Frank Halstead noted that "the practical upper limits of
[telegraph transmission] speed will also be limited by the ability of some
human beings to operate a keyboard, until such time as electrical connection
be made direct with the receiver's central nervous system"
[@halstead_genesis_1949, 451]. The history of human-computer interaction
began with the manipulation of physical switches, first by hand and then by
removable storage media like paper tape and punch card. The next phase was
dialogic and conversational in nature. Conversational computing introduced the
idea of a mediating agent, an interpreter, who could translate from a limited
number of natural human language commands into the specialized vocabulary of
signals that could alter the machine configuration. The "direct manipulation"
school of human-computer interaction has led us further towards mimesis,
simulating machine states as virtual environments resembling real-world
objects and their properties.

The trajectory from direct *physical* manipulation to direct *virtual*
manipulation leads to the totalizing loss of resemblances and designations
that Baudrillard warned us about. At its logical extreme, the simulacrum
supplants the thing being simulated. It appears as hyper-reality, the
experience of unmediated interaction without awareness or sense of the
underlying referent. All "objects of interest" within such a modeled world are
fabricated objects. They are thus limited to the external, artificial
constraints imposed by their makers. Such manufactured experiences present us,
the "users," with compelling, possibly cathartic, metaphors. The metaphor
extends far beyond entertainment, subsuming all spheres of social activity
mediated by computers. The manipulation of metaphors---a reflective, not
merely circumspect inhabitance of virtual worlds---therefore requires not just
a willing suspension of disbelief, but also poetics: hermeneutics, close
reading, distant reading, deconstruction, morphology, in short precisely the
legacy of interpretive practice that stretches from Aristotle to Susan Sontag
and beyond. The suspension of disbelief otherwise threatens to become a
permanent condition, alienating as it is pleasurable or cathartic.

At the time of writing this book, our society stands at the threshold of a new
paradigm of interacting with computers and hence with each other. Direct brain
to computer interfaces are common enough today to be turned into a
toy.[^ln3-mindflex] Early brain--computer interfaces used either imprecise
"noisy" electroencephalographic (EEG) scalp sensors or electrode implants that
required invasive surgery. In 2004 a team of scientists developed a way of
controlling "a one-dimensional computer cursor rapidly and accurately" using
electrocorticographic (ECoG) activity recorded from the surface of the brain
[@leuthardt_braincomputer_2004; @miller_spectral_2007]. And in 2015, a
quadriplegic woman piloted an F-35 Joint Strike Fighter using her brain in a
simulation developed by the University of Pittsburgh's Human Engineering
Research Laboratories in collaboration with the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) [@collinger_collaborative_2014; @prabhakar_how_2015].
On the surface, the advance of brain--computer interfaces seems to bring us
closer to the vision of increasing directness: the "no interface" movement in
design, interaction between people and machines without intermediary symbols,
words, or images. *No Interface*, *Don't Make me Think*, and *Hooked: How to
Build Habit-Forming Products* are some of the most well-written and
best-selling titles advancing this argument [@krug_dont_2014;
@eyal_hooked:_2014; @krishna_best_2015]. Military applications aside, we must
prepare for a future in affective, mystical arts, the ultimate loss of
references and resemblances, where works of art are to be experienced
emotively past the senses: literature without language or representation,
painting beyond media, asemiosis---messages lacking a sign.

However futuristic such possibilities may seem to us today, we should not lose
sight of the mediated nature of human-computer interaction in all of its
forms: paper, ink, silicone. Media intercedes. As technological dreams become
reality they also grow less interesting and more mundane. We tend not to think
about them; they become habit. Habituation smoothes the rough edges of
irreconcilability between human and machine. The tool recedes from view,
beginning to seem like a natural and direct extension of the body. I do not
mean to dismiss the mastery of those engaged in creating the illusion of
directness. Pleasure and catharsis are important in some contexts. In other
contexts, we must privilege reflection, analysis, and interruption.
Computational poetics should therefore aim to arrest the encounter: to make it
seem less natural, to bring the receding media to light, and to expose the
mediating systems supporting the simulation. A measure of discomfort in the
fit between bodies, keyboards, and screens ensures our ability to structure
the encounter on our own terms: to opt in when useful and to opt out when
necessary. My concern is not with the metaphysical entailments of a possible
posthuman future. The illusion of directness belies the very human mechanisms
of command and control. The simulation ultimately embodies specific power
structures in an economy of exchange between physical and mental resources. In
this market there are those who profit and those whose virtual avatars become
a commodity.

The above comments apply to computation generally. We will spend the following
chapters peeling apart the layers of the literary and the bibliographic
simulation in particular. Once the electronic book can be perceived as
computation in kind, we can begin to examine the incongruence in the
structures of meaning-making at the sites of storage and projection. If we
consider "what you see is what you get" as a type of a commitment to a
motivated metaphor, the following chapters will help us understand the ways of
seeing and the material particulates of getting. The electronic book shall
come to fore as a literary device.

<!-- can say something indexical interfaces and preserving the space ulterior to
help tie in with the introduction -->

<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->

[^ln1-carroll]: @carroll_annotated_1960, 55. See @huxley_raven_1976 and
@susina_why_2001 for a range of possible answers, including Carroll's own:
"Because it can produce a few notes, though they are very flat; and it is
nevar [sic] put with the wrong end in front" [@carroll_alices_1971, xv;
@susina_why_2001, 16-7].

[^ln1-database]: In describing his Relational Calculus Expression for Metaphor
Generation Lawrence F. Young writes that the "key to this model is the
observation that any entity can be metaphorically associated with another
entity" [@young_metaphor_1987, 312].

[^ln1-dead]: For a book length summary on this topic see
@muller_metaphors_2008.

[^ln1-metalakoff]: [@lakoff_contemporary_1998] See also
@turner_conceptual_1995; @ruiz_de_mendoza_ibanez_nature_1998;
@lakoff_invariance_2009.

[^ln1-mindflex]: The American toy giant Mattel makes a game called "Mindflex."
The Frequently Asked Questions page includes the following prompt: "Have you
ever dreamed of moving an object with the power of your mind? Mindflex Duel™
makes that dream a reality! Utilizing advanced Mindflex Duel™ technology, the
wireless headset reads your brainwave activity. Concentrate...and the ball
rises on a cushion of air! Relax...and the ball descends. It's literally mind
over matter!" (@mindflex_mindflex:_2015)

[^ln1-nested]: The notion of "digital text" itself is a metaphor. Files do not
really hold texts. The idea of "text" identifies a segment of stored memory
coupled with control codes that govern layout and projection in specific
material context. Together, these diverse signals and physical affordances
create the illusion of a single text.

[^ln1-rmedium]: For example, see Paul Ricoeur writing on the change in media
from speaking to writing: "The most obvious change from speaking to writing
concerns the relation between message and its medium or channel. At first
glance, it concerns only this relation, but upon closer examination, the first
alteration irradiates in every direction, affecting in decisive manner all the
factors and functions" [@ricur_interpretation_1976, 25].

\newpage
